=head1 NAME
 
Parse::Eyapp::Parse - The parser of Eyapp grammars
 
=head1 Eyapp Grammar 


The parser for the C<Eyapp> language
was written and generated
using C<Parse::Eyapp> and the C<eyapp> compiler (actually
the first version 
was bootstrapped using the L<yapp|Parse::Yapp> compiler).
The Eyapp program parsing the C<Eyapp> language
is in the file C<Parse/Eyapp/Parse.yp> 
in the C<Parse::Eyapp> distribution.
Therefore C<Parse::Eyapp::Parse> 
objects have all the methods in C<Parse::Eyapp::driver>.

A C<Parse::Eyapp::Parse> is nothing but a particular kind of C<Parse::Eyapp>
parser: I<the one that parses> C<Eyapp> I<grammars>.




This section describes the syntax of the Eyapp language using its own notation.
The grammar extends L<yacc> and L<yapp> grammars.
Semicolons have been omitted to save space.
Between C-like comments you can find an (informal) 
explanation of the language 
associated with the token.


  eyapp: head body tail ;
  symbol: LITERAL  /* A string literal like 'hello' */
      |   ident   
  ident:  IDENT  /* IDENT is [A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]* */ 
  head: headsec '%%'
  headsec:  decl *
  decl:  '\n'      
      |   SEMANTIC typedecl symlist '\n'  /* SEMANTIC  is %semantic\s+token      */
      |   SYNTACTIC typedecl symlist '\n' /* SYNTACTIC is %syntactic\s+token     */
      |   TOKEN typedecl symlist '\n'     /* TOKEN     is %token                 */
      |   ASSOC typedecl symlist '\n'     /* ASSOC     is %(left|right|nonassoc) */
      |   START ident '\n'                /* START     is %start                 */
      |   HEADCODE '\n'                   /* HEADCODE  is %{ Perl code ... %}    */
      |   UNION CODE '\n'                 /* UNION CODE  see yacc/bison          */
      |   DEFAULTACTION CODE '\n'         /* DEFAULTACTION is %defaultaction     */
      |   TREE treeclauses? '\n'          /* TREE      is %tree                  */
      |   METATREE '\n'                   /* METATREE  is %metatree              */
      |   TYPE typedecl identlist '\n'    /* TYPE      is %type                  */
      |   EXPECT NUMBER '\n'              /* EXPECT    is %expect                */
                                          /* NUMBER    is \d+                    */
  typedecl:   /* empty */
      |       '<' IDENT '>'
  treeclauses: BYPASS ALIAS? | ALIAS BYPASS?
  symlist:    symbol + 
  identlist:  ident +
  body: rules * '%%'
  rules: IDENT ':' rhss ';'  
  rhss: rule <+ '|'>  
  rule:   optname rhs (prec epscode)?
  rhs:  rhseltwithid *
  rhseltwithid : 
        rhselt '.' IDENT 
      | '$' rhselt  
      | rhselt
  rhselt:     symbol    
      | code    
      | '(' optname rhs ')' 
      | rhselt STAR               /* STAR   is (%name\s*([A-Za-z_]\w*)\s*)?\*  */
      | rhselt '<' STAR symbol '>' 
      | rhselt OPTION             /* OPTION is (%name\s*([A-Za-z_]\w*)\s*)?\?  */
      | rhselt '<' PLUS symbol '>'
      | rhselt PLUS               /* PLUS   is (%name\s*([A-Za-z_]\w*)\s*)?\+  */
  optname: (NAME IDENT)?          /* NAME is %name */
         | NOBYPASS IDENT         /* NOBYPASS is %no\s+bypass */
  prec: PREC symbol               /* PREC is %prec */
  epscode:  code ?   
  code:   
      CODE           /* CODE     is { Perl code ... }         */
    | BEGINCODE      /* BEGINCODE is %begin { Perl code ... } */
  tail:  TAILCODE ?  /* TAILCODE is { Perl code ... } */

The semantic of C<Eyapp> agrees with the semantic of C<yacc> and C<yapp>
for all the common constructions. 





=head1 AUTHOR
 
Casiano Rodriguez-Leon (casiano@ull.es)

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported by CEE (FEDER) and the Spanish Ministry of
I<Educación y Ciencia> through I<Plan Nacional I+D+I> number TIN2005-08818-C04-04
(ULL::OPLINK project L<http://www.oplink.ull.es/>). 
Support from Gobierno de Canarias was through GC02210601
(I<Grupos Consolidados>).
The University of La Laguna has also supported my work in many ways
and for many years.

A large percentage of  code is verbatim taken from Parse::Yapp 1.05.
The author of Parse::Yapp is Francois Desarmenien.
 
I wish to thank Francois Desarmenien for his C<Parse::Yapp> module, 
to my students at La Laguna and to the Perl Community. Special thanks to 
my family and Larry Wall.

=head1 LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT
 
Copyright (c) 2006-2007 Casiano Rodriguez-Leon (casiano@ull.es). All rights reserved.

Parse::Yapp copyright is of Francois Desarmenien, all rights reserved. 1998-2001
 
These modules are free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. See L<perlartistic>.
 
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 



