=head1 NAME 

Parse::Eyapp::Scope - Support for Scope Analysis
 
=head1 SYNOPSIS
 
  # Fragment of the grammar in examples/Types.eyp 
  funcDef:
      $ID 
         { 
           $ids->begin_scope(); 
         }
      '('  $params  ')' 
        $block
      {
         my $st = $block->{symboltable}; 
         my @decs = $params->children(); 
         $block->{parameters} = [];
         while (my ($bt, $id, $arrspec) = splice(@decs, 0, 3)) {
             $bt = ref($bt); # The string 'INT', 'CHAR', etc.
             my $name = $id->{attr}[0];
             my $type = build_type($bt, $arrspec);
             $type{$type} = Parse::Eyapp::Node->hnew($type); 

             # control duplicated declarations
               die "Duplicated declaration of $name at line $id->{attr}[1]\n" 
             if exists($st->{$name});

             $st->{$name}->{type} = $type;
             $st->{$name}->{param} = 1;
             $st->{$name}->{line} = $id->{attr}[1];
             push @{$block->{parameters}}, $name;
         }
         $block->{function_name} = $ID;
         $block->type("FUNCTION");

         my ($nodec, $dec) = $ids->end_scope($st, $block, 'type');

         # Type checking: add a direct pointer to the data-structure
         # describing the type
         $_->{t} = $type{$_->{type}} for @$dec;

         return $block;
      }
  ;
 
  ...

  Primary:
      %name INUM
      INUM 
    | %name CHARCONSTANT
      CHARCONSTANT
    | $Variable 
        { 
          $ids->scope_instance($Variable); 
          return $Variable 
        }
    | '(' expression ')' { $_[2] }
    | $function_call 
        { 
          $ids->scope_instance($function_call); 
          return $function_call  # bypass
        }
  ;
    
=head1 Scope Analysis with Parse::Eyapp::Scope

A scope manager helps to compute the mapping function
that maps the uses (instances) of 
source objects to their definitions. For instance, 
when dealing with I<identifier scope analysis> the problem is to associate
each ocurrence of an identifier with the declaration
that applies to it. Another example is I<loop scope analysis>
where the problem is to associate each occurrence
of a C<CONTINUE> or C<BREAK> node with the 
shallowest C<LOOP> that encloses it. Or I<label scope
analysis>, the problem to associate a C<GOTO>
node with the node to jump to, that is,
with the C<STATEMENT> associated with the label.

To take advantage of C<Parse::Eyapp::Scope>, 
the compiler writer must mark at the appropriate time 
(for example a new block or new subroutine for I<identifier scope analysis>,
a new loop for I<loop scope analysis>, etc.) the I<beginning of a new scope>
calling the method L<begin_scope|/$scope-E<gt>begin_scope>.
From that point on any I<ocurring instance> of an object 
(for example,
variables in expressions for I<identifier scope analysis>, breaks and continues
for I<loop scope analysis>, etc.) must be declared 
calling the method L<scope_instance|/$scope-E<gt>scope_instance>.
The programmer must also mark the I<end of the current scope> 
at the appropriate time. 

=head2 $scope->end_scope

There are two ways of calling C<$scope-E<gt>end_scope>.
The first one is for Scope Analysis Problems where
a symbol table is needed (for example in I<identifier scope analysis>
and I<label scope analysis>.

=head3 $scope->end_scope with first Arg a Symbol Table

For each I<ocurring instance> of an object C<$x>
that occurred since the last call to  L<begin_scope|/$scope-E<gt>begin_scope>
the call to 

  $scope->end_scope(\%symboltable, $definition_node, 'attr1', 'attr2', ... )

decorates the I<ocurring instance> C<$x> with several attributes: 

=over

=item * An entry C<$x-E<gt>{SCOPE_NAME}> is built that will reference C<$definition_node>.

=item * An entry C<$x-E<gt>{ENTRY_NAME}> is built. That
entry references C<$symboltable{$x-E<gt>key}> (to have a
faster access from the instance to the attributes of the object).
The instantiated nodes must have a C<$x-E<gt>key> method which provides
the entry for the node in the symbol table:

  pl@nereida:~/src/perl/YappWithDefaultAction/examples$ sed -ne '651,657p' Types.eyp
  sub VAR::key {
    my $self = shift;

    return $self->child(0)->{attr}[0];
  }

  *VARARRAY::key = *FUNCTIONCALL::key = \&VAR::key;

=item * For each aditional arguments C<attr#k> an
entry C<$x-E<gt>{attr#k>} will be built.
That entry references C<$symboltable{$x-E<gt>key}{attr#k}>. Therefore
the entry for C<$x> in the symbol table must already 
have a field named C<attr#k>.

=back

In a list context C<$scopeE<gt>end_scope> returns
two references. The first one
is a reference to a list of node instantiated
that weren't defined in the current scope.
The second is a reference to a list of nodes
that were defined in this scope. 
In a scalar context returns the first of these two.
An instance C<$x> is I<defined> if, and only if, 
C<exists $symboltable{$_-E<gt>key}>.

=head3 $scope->end_scope for Simple Scope Analysis

Some scope analysis problems do not require the existence
of a symbol table (for instance, the problem of associating
a C<RETURN> node with the C<FUNCTION> that encloses it). 
For such kind of problems C<$scopeE<gt>end_scope> provides
a second form of call.
The second way to call C<$scopeE<gt>end_scope> is

                 $declared = $scopemanager->end_scope($definition_node);

The only argument is the reference to the node that controls/defines
the scope. The method returns a reference to the declared
nodes. Any node instanced with C<scope_instance>
since the last call to C<begin_scope> is considered I<declared>.

=head2 $scope->begin_scope

Marks the beginning of an scope.
Example (file C<examples/Types.eyp>):

   loopPrefix:
       $WHILE '(' expression ')'
         {
           $loops->begin_scope;
           $_[3]->{line} = $WHILE->[1]; # Save the line for error diagostic
           $_[3]
         }

=head2 $scope->scope_instance

Declares the node argument to be an occurring instance of the scope:

   nereida:~/doc/casiano/PLBOOK/PLBOOK/code> \
       sed -ne '375,380p' Simple6.eyp | cat -n
    1      $Variable '=' binary
    2        {
    3          my $parser = shift;
    4          $ids->scope_instance($Variable);
    5          $parser->YYBuildAST(@_); # "Manually" build the node
    6        }


=head2 Parse::Eyapp::Scope->new

C<Parse::Eyapp::Scope-E<gt>new> returns a scope managment object. 
The scope mapping function is implemented 
by C<Parse::Eyapp::Scope> through a set of attributes
that are added to the nodes involved in the scope analysis.
The names of these attributes can be specified 
using the parameters of C<Parse::Eyapp::Scope-E<gt>new>.
The arguments of C<new> are:

=over

=item * C<SCOPE_NAME> 
is the name chosen for the attribute of the 
I<node instance>  which will held
the reference to the I<definition node>.
If not specified it will take the value C<"scope">.

=item * C<ENTRY_NAME> is the name of the attribute of the
I<node instance>  which will held
the reference to the symbol table entry.
By default takes the value C<"entry">.

=item * C<SCOPE_DEPTH> is the name for an attribute of the 
I<definition node>. Optional. If not specified it will not be
defined.

=back




=head1 SEE ALSO
  
=over

=item * L<Parse::Eyapp>,

=item * The tutorial I<Parsing Strings and Trees with> C<Parse::Eyapp>
(An Introduction to Compiler Construction in seven pages)> in

=item * The pdf files in L<http://nereida.deioc.ull.es/~pl/perlexamples/Eyapp.pdf> 


=item * L<http://nereida.deioc.ull.es/~pl/perlexamples/section_eyappts.html> (Spanish),

=item * L<eyapp>,

=item * L<treereg>,

=item * L<Parse::yapp>,

=item * yacc(1),

=item * bison(1),

=item * the classic book "Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools" by Alfred V. Aho, Ravi Sethi and

=item * Jeffrey D. Ullman (Addison-Wesley 1986)

=item * L<Parse::RecDescent>.

=back


=head1 AUTHOR
 
Casiano Rodriguez-Leon (casiano@ull.es)

=head1 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been supported by CEE (FEDER) and the Spanish Ministry of
I<Educación y Ciencia> through I<Plan Nacional I+D+I> number TIN2005-08818-C04-04
(ULL::OPLINK project L<http://www.oplink.ull.es/>). 
Support from Gobierno de Canarias was through GC02210601
(I<Grupos Consolidados>).
The University of La Laguna has also supported my work in many ways
and for many years.

A large percentage of  code is verbatim taken from Parse::Yapp 1.05.
The author of Parse::Yapp is Francois Desarmenien.
 
I wish to thank Francois Desarmenien for his C<Parse::Yapp> module, 
to my students at La Laguna and to the Perl Community. Special thanks to 
my family and Larry Wall.

=head1 LICENCE AND COPYRIGHT
 
Copyright (c) 2006-2007 Casiano Rodriguez-Leon (casiano@ull.es). All rights reserved.

Parse::Yapp copyright is of Francois Desarmenien, all rights reserved. 1998-2001
 
These modules are free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself. See L<perlartistic>.
 
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 



